
Heads of the G7 leading industrial nations, chaired by David Cameron, on Wednesday called on Vladimir Putin to engage with Ukraine's incoming President Petro Poroshenko, but stopped short of triggering fresh sanctions against Russia at a curtailed two-day summit in Brussels. The group is keeping its options open, saying it is willing to escalate sanctions if Russia fails to engage in a peaceful resolution of the crisis. The G7 leaders – many of whom are due to see the Russian president individually later this week about the D-day commemorations in Normandy – are likely to impress on Putin to meet Poroshenko to open a dialogue on the kind of federal structure Ukraine might develop, as well as future trade relations. Cameron's spokeswoman said: "The Ukrainian elections last week had given a clear mandate, and we will work with the new Ukrainian president." She added there was no sign yet that Russia was using its influence to rein in the Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine. Russia sought an emergency meeting of the UN security council this week to call for a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine and the introduction of humanitarian corridors for refugees from Ukraine into Russia. The G7 statement described the Russian annexation of Crimea as illegal, stating: "We are united in condemning the Russian Federation's continuing violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine". It also condemned "the use of energy supplies as a means of political coercion" and called for energy security and the diversification of supplies to be "at the centre of our collective agenda". Putin had been due to chair a full meeting of the G8 in Russia, but the remaining seven nations pulled out in protest at the annexation of Crimea. It is the first time Russia has been excluded from the forum in 17 years. Putin will meet Cameron on Friday, as well as the German chancellor Angela Merkel, for meetings on the margins of the Normandy D-day commemorations. He will also meet President François Hollande in Paris the night before the celebrations, suggesting Putin is hardly being excluded from discussions with western leaders. France has been under pressure, mainly from the Poles, to cancel plans to sell Mistral helicopter carriers to Russia. Cameron will also hold a one-hour meeting with Obama in Brussels on Thursday, at which they will discuss how Cameron should approach his meeting with Putin, as well as Afghanistan. Russia has tried to brush aside the significance of the boycott, describing the G7 as an informal club, but Russia had fought hard to gain entry to the forum and now faces the possibility of long term exclusion. In the absence of Russia, Cameron will informally chair discussions on Ukraine on Wednesday night and Merkel will lead the discussions on Thursday. The G7 discussions will focus not just on Ukraine, but also on Syria, the global economy, trade and climate change, including European independence from Russian gas supplies. The group will again claim that here is no future for Syria with President Assad in charge, as well as rejecting the legitimacy of the elections underway in Syria. In a sign of some de-escalation over the Ukrainian crisis, Russia removed 40,000 troops from the Ukrainian border, but there has been no indication it is pulling back the support it is giving to Russian-led disruption in eastern Ukraine. It is likely Cameron will use some of his time in Brussels to reiterate his opposition to Jean-Claude Juncker becoming the next European Commission President. He yesterday rang Herman Van Rompuy, the President of the European Council, to reiterate his opposition to Juncker, a positionstance that puts him at odds with Merkel, an ally he badly needs in years to come. 

	[glennor]
	De-escalate? If we wanted stability we would not have toppled their government, this is all about expanding the Western sphere of influence. How about pressuring Kiev to stop using the military to kill protesters and instead seek negotiation and compromise?

		[ID2692920]
		I'm actually against violence from either side. But how can you explain that there's is so many Russian citizens among these people who proclaimed these &quot;independent states&quot;. Why they are so well armed? I'm not saying local population doesn't support them, but this armed conflict is clearly provoked by Russia.

		[ID2692920]
		Your mention of AK-47s gives away your cold war era thinking. How's the view from your bunker?   who cares what's the correct name of their guns. they certainly didn't go there waving flowers and anti-Kiev posters.

		[MishkaYaponchik]
		No, can you share some of your nerds and hippies, I hear they are used to being beaten with batons and pepper sprayed by now.

		[Vladimir Kaltovich]
		and you likely forgot as SBU kidnapped people? thousands people are flung in prisons of Kiev... And by the way I want to remind at first there was a question of the republics as a part of Ukraine without any separation... But after massacre of the Kiev junta and rejection of any sentences it was declared independence of these republics after a referendum

		[Kikinaskald]
		Here's a radical idea: Instead of being in the Russian sphere of influence, why not let Ukraine be in Ukraine's people's sphere of influence?   Good idea. But for that the first thing you'd have to do is to expropriate and arrest the oligarchs, to close all the Western funded NGO's, let them deal normally with Russia if they want (when Yanucovitch decided to accept a deal with Russia he was deposed). You should not forget that the East Ucrainians also have their interests and rights and because of that representants of the West would have to negotiate with representants of the East instead of sending troops.    Talking about &quot;spheres of influence&quot; is so Molotov-Ribbentropish and last century.   A good idea, why not close Nato? It's heavily in the business of &quot;spheres of influence&quot;.

	[Ludwitt]
	Given that the underlying issue of the entire crisis is that the USG is bent on isolating Russia, and replacing the Soviet Union as the patron of Eastern Europe (whose leaders and spy / military agencies are simply taking orders from a different master, with &quot;democracy&quot; like in the US being window dressing to disguise the overwhelming influence of the rich over policy as a much-cited Princeton Study concluded), there will be the same shrill statements from the Western leaders (coordinated centrally from Washington of course) and faithfully amplified by the Western corporate media. It is interesting those who profess &quot;democracy&quot; and &quot;equality&quot; see no contradictions in forums like the g7 or the Bilderburg club in which the rich and powerful effectively cosy up on how to run the world. So there will a lot lf pomp and ceremony and noise about &quot;the people of Ukraine&quot;. For the real people of Ukraine the pain the IMF and Western bankers and corporation will inflict is just beginning.  And so it goes.

		[Jeremn]
		The West is unwilling to pay for Ukraine, but ready to take the most lucrative parts of the economy. It should be evident that with Poroshenko, a former economics minister who worked closely with the previous president, in charge centrally, and oligarchs in charge at the regional level, that the stage is set for the further exploitation of Ukraine. This time with more of the profit heading West.

		[onu labu]
		This comment was removed by a moderator because it didn't abide by our community standards. Replies may also be deleted. For more detail see our FAQs.

	[Vladimir Kaltovich]
	Putin shan't do any talks to the president-murderer of the Ukrainian people... With Ukraine Russia shall have no negotiations and any trade... let EU and the USA sponsor the colony and puppets fascists

		[geldofrocks]
		This is what Mr. O-Bomber just paid for. A Right Sector unit of their newest battalion in their new US paid for Swat tactical outfits complete with nazi ceremony and nazi lightning strike flag at the 2:34 mark. Who would think the US and EU would be paying to outfit these guys on the anniversary of D-Day 70 years later? We truly have gone down the rabbit hole. http://youtu.be/XoKlsv7IqqU

		[NoToNeo]
		I expect your a UKIP voter.

		[Vladimir Kaltovich]
		the main thing that Ukraine will cease to develop as the modern state... in the east of Ukraine there are mines and plants, workers pay a tax on each salary to state treasury... in the west of Ukraine the majority goes on operation to Europe and they don't pay any taxes to the state...

		[FrankTheFrank]
		This comment was removed by a moderator because it didn't abide by our community standards. Replies may also be deleted. For more detail see our FAQs.

		[John Freeder]
		This is why the UKIP is doing so well in elections here.

	[EbbTide64]
	Crimea is gone. Donbass is going. Putin will be able to drive to Crimea by the time this is over. Really stupid, counter-productive meddling by the EU & America, unless they secretly meant to split the country into pro-Russia and pro-west halves.

		[Oilyheart]
		Exactly, Mishka, the Kiev Oligarchy can &quot;win&quot; the war, but they can't win the peace after the catalogue of war crimes they have sponsored against civilians. As the famous saying goes, &quot;Ukraine died in Odessa.&quot;

		[MishkaYaponchik]
		Divide and conquer, that's their motto. Donbass is gone, even if the junta defeats the separatists, the local population will forever be hostile.

		[firstgeordie]
		hostile against whom their own countrymen ora government which comes and goes? the fact there is a total mess in the country is because there is no rule of law endemic corruption etc and where did it come from?the wonderful totalitarian system of the last 90 years which has caused deaths in the old soviet union of 50 million Russians and Ukrainians are brothers what they need to do is wake up and set out on the long road to democracy together

		[gimmeshoes]
		The Dumbass has certainly gone: https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=264381550412321&set=a.220820914768385.1073741828.220542374796239&type=1&theater But do you think people are stupid? They have bags of experience relating to Russian strategy.

	[TedMorgan38]
	Deal with Poroshenko, the West's chosen oligarch who bears direct responsibility for the use of cluster bombs in Lugansk against civilians?

		[NeitherYankNorBrit]
		Thank god Russia has no oligarchs running that free, peaceful utopia.

		[MishkaYaponchik]
		Not running Russia. Many of the ones from the 90s have been arrested for their criminal acts, some have fled overseas. That is the difference, Putin dedicated his whole life serving his country, he is a public servant. Porosh robbed Ukraine blind and killed people in the 90s and he continues to do so as president.

		[MishkaYaponchik]
		Porosh must be dealt with.

		[John Freeder]
		Daisy Cutters.

		[MonsieurPetanque]
		Some kind of missile or artillery shell rather than cluster bombs but still horrific. All violent death is tragic.

	[philipf]
	Can you please evidence the support you state Russia is giving the rebels? Good journalism requires a bit more than kissing the cares of Obama. I look in vain for factual on the ground reporting. RT may be pro Russian but is far more informative than the BBC

		[rustyblood]
		Have you ran out of drugs? RT is laughable, Id go as far as saying I don't believe anything written in the papers, unless I hear an interview (aka from the horses mouth) or see clear footage, I'm sceptical.

		[whitja01]
		All evidence given by Kerry and Kiev has turned up a damp squid--the false photographs stolen from a journalist's instagram account and actually shot in Ukraine, the Russian Lieutenant-Colonel who turned out to be an unemployed local undertaker, etc. The evidence has been discredited, but still they rant. Right Sector has established a Goebel's Research Institute, perhaps they are taking their cues from that distinguished alumni.

	[TOR2000]
	U.S. Department of State, Daily press briefing, June 3 QUESTION: The OSCE confirmed that the explosion at the Luhansk city administration was indeed an airstrike. Civilians died there. And Kyiv has so far denied responsibility for that incident. Who do you believe? MS. HARF: This is the June 2nd incident? QUESTION: On Tuesday, the OSCE -- MS. HARF: There are conflicting reports about this. QUESTION: Who do you believe more, the OSCE or Kyiv? MS. HARF: Well, we’re still looking into it. There are conflicting reports about this. I actually hadn’t seen an OSCE statement, so let me check on that. And of course, in general, welcome the restraint the Government of Ukraine has shown in the face of overwhelming and unacceptable Russian interference and see no credible evidence to the contrary.

		[John Freeder]
		Rflmao! they are troglodytes, aren't they.With all their nuke arsenal, it is tragic and a health hazard to Planet Earth.

		[Marqus]
		And he left press conference to ask Psaki

		[John Freeder]
		LOL! Are these true quotes?!

	[annieruth]
	Why no reports in The Guardian of the air attack on Luhansk? Even CNN has filed on this one. http://edition.cnn.com/2014/06/03/world/europe/ukraine-luhansk-building-attack/index.html?hpt=hp_c1

		[vivianvivian]
		Thanks for the link. Even The CNN report clearly says it is a air attack from Ukrainian army, not the RPG story from Ukrainian media. OSCE gives a similar conclusion. The Coup government can't hide the truth from the world. Whoever ordered the attack will answer for law one day.

		[Alex Ch]
		I posted some links to the OSCE report and video of CNN news. Moderators deleted my posts ((((((((((((

		[whitja01]
		Join the club. I was deleted, too, after strongly criticizing Guardian coverage of Ukraine.  No, I'm not a Russian bot or whatever, but a full professor of social science at a western university. Another poster has stated that a number of people posting links have been deleted. I'm not sure why that could even be considered 'against community standards'. Especially OSCE and CNN.  Frankly, I've learned a lot more about Ukraine from CIF commentators than..... Let's see if this gets posted.

	[JMWong]
	&quot;Western countries wants Russian government to recognise country's newly elected leader and to rein in the separatist.&quot;Who are these western countries who want this and that?They are a bunch of muderers, genociders and torturers. They have murdered, tortured and destroyed the lives of hundreds of millions people all over the World. They are responsible for the colonisation of almost all the World, for wiping out the native populations of Australia ans North American, for carrying out the mist shameful slaves trade across the Atlantic, for launching the First and Second World wars which resulted in the killing of more than one hundred million people, for invading Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq and countless smaller countries, for assassinating hundreds of politicians and svientists worldwide, for bombing Libya, for causing disorder and unrest in almost all countries, in particular, Syria and Ukraine. And they have the guts to ask other countries to adhere to their demands. Shameless. Disgusting.

		[VictorMel]
		As policy analyst Noam Chomsky has said many times, “If the Nuremberg laws were applied, then every post-war American president would have been hanged.” http://www.globalresearch.ca/west-point-obama-defends-us-aggression-on-the-grounds-of-american-exceptionalism/5385273

		[WhatTheTruth]
		Yes, and the truth is made by the winners that's why they'll be right and believe it.............. until they lose, as all empires do. P.S. They are fighting for justice and the good of the world!!

	[Kal El]
	How many of you wet yourselves with laughter ? when you read that Camoron first needs a 1hr meeting with Obama in order to be told what he needs to say when he meets Vlad the next day.

		[ZeeSifter]
		Maybe they'll take a selfie!

		[flower4711]
		Yes, cameleon needs to know which colour to put on in a dangerous environment or cormoran needs an elder to teach him how to talk to avoid looking stupid and uninformed in the presence of someone who is somewhat superior to him in intellect and statesmanship.

		[Tonya6]
		It seems all countries in Europe are not independent and afraid to do anything against USA order. Why is that? Because of military superiority of US? Or economical dependency?

		[Robert Sandlin]
		I was a bit ashamed for him.But also that its reported like its the most natural think in the world. Like &quot;What do you want me to tell him boss.But what if he gets mean with me&quot;.And people call Blair a lapdog,geez.

		[Kal El]
		Hands up, don't be shy now, there's no embarrassment in admitting it.

	[tanyushka]
	in 1993 the Russian Parliament voted to impeach Yeltsin for 636 against 2 votes, everybody had got enough of this drunkard's policies and his blind submission to the IMF which had brought poverty to nearly half the Russian people... not many people died of hunger only because the 90's weren't the Stalin's 30' & nutrition & helth services were much more developed to save the poors in extremis... Against the Constitutional Tribunal's veredict, Yeltsin declared Martial Law and bombed the Parliament... over 100 people died but the Western Media presented it all as a valiant defence of Yeltsin against a Communist insurrection, even if the Communist Party represent only a fraction of all the parties that had voted against him... many MP's were killed as well as many youngsters & ordinary people... Why is it that under very similar circumstances -& assuming only for the sake of presenting my case that Yanukovich was the only responsible of the Maidan deaths, naively assuming that the Right Sector had nothign to do with them-... why is it that what was blessed by the USA & the EU then is now used by the same entities to give their approval of the murders of innocent civilians in Donetsk & Luhansk? Is it that the Western Powers enjoy blood spilling? Or may be it is just that they both serve their only Master, the IMF & the plutocrats of the world?

		[whitja01]
		Thanks for all this information, it is instructive to hear some specifics of the Yeltsin chaos years, the years that Russia was looted by the IMF and western oil companies. Something that has never been reported by the western media was the massive loss of life expectancy in Russia during the 1990s....Utsa Patnaik, an Indian economist, has discussed it as equivalent to a famine, which, we know from Amartya Sen, is caused not by a lack of food per se, but by a lack of access of the many to food or the means to purchase it. The 'Western' leaders have been caught with their hands in a cookie jar in the Ukraine coup d'etat, but continue brazenly to deny their role and to blame Russia. They are lying, and, yes, the plutocrats, the banksters, and the IMF are their masters. That they don't even bother to hide anymore.

		[John Freeder]
		it is just that they both serve their only Master, the IMF & the plutocrats of the world.   This is the correct assessment.

		[NeitherYankNorBrit]
		Take a breath. Learn how to use the return key.
